There are many obstacles to putting human boots on the surface of another planet (as evidenced by the current lack of human boots on the surface of another planet). Perhaps the easiest way to determine what these obstacles are is to put ourselves in the shoes of those who are attempting to identify and overcome these obstacles.

-----

Suppose we work for a company currently employed as a subcontractor for a space agency, and we’re tasked with building a plan for visiting another planet. Our main goal would be to identify the most conducive planet to both travel and human habitation, then to figure out a way to get there.

Choosing a planet to land on is relatively straight forward. The basic requirement is that the planet has a ground to land on. While this may seem banal, many planets do not even meet these requirements. Planets in our solar system beyond the asteroid belt are known as gas giants: they are large planets made primarily of gaseous materials. There is no rocky, solid surface for a spacecraft to land on, nor is there even a well-defined point at which an object could be said to be “on the surface of” any gas giant. It becomes rather difficult to put boots on the ground when there is no ground to speak of. There are some terrestrial planets beyond the gas giants, however they become increasingly difficult to reach, in large part due to the sheer time it would take to reach them. The closest of these, Pluto (the first terrestrial object after the gas giants), takes about about 9.5 years to reach (using the transit time of New Horizons <sup>[7](https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/newhorizons/overview/)</sup>.

If gas giants are impossible to land on, then it makes sense to choose a planet a little closer to home. Terrestrial planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars) provide that elusive “ground” so disappointingly lacking from further planets. Of these three other terrestrial planets, Venus and Mars are both attractive candidates simply due to their proximity to Earth. Once a spacecraft is in space (i.e. in orbit around Earth), the amount of energy required to leave Earth’s orbit and travel to another planet is theoretically the same for any given planet. This is because there is no friction or other opposing forces in space (assuming the object in question is in a stable solar orbit) which would require energy to keep the craft moving. However, proximity offers two main benefits: the surface conditions (atmosphere, temperatures, material composition, gravity, etc.) are more likely to be similar to Earth’s, and orbital rendezvous would be easier to plan as there are fewer obstacles.

Conditions on Venus (planetary mass, density, and thus gravity) are similar enough to Earth’s that astronomers have nicknamed Venus as Earth’s twin; its mass is ~80% that of Earth, and its gravity is ~90% that of Earth <sup>[2](http://sci.esa.int/venus-express/34067-venus-vs-earth/)</sup>. However, its atmosphere is radically different from Earth’s. Venus has an atmospheric density of about 90 times that of Earth, and an atmospheric composition of primarily carbon dioxide with clouds of sulfuric acid. This thick atmosphere produces an extreme greenhouse effect with incredible surface temperatures varying only slightly from an average of 465°C (which is hot enough to melt lead). For comparison, Earth’s most extreme recorded temperatures range from -89°C to 58°C <sup>[1](http://earthguide.ucsd.edu/eoc/special_topics/teach/sp_climate_change/p_planet_temp.html)</sup>. Even for the most tropically-inclined humans, these temperatures are far too extreme to support unprotected human life.

Conditions on Mars, however, are somewhat similar to Earth’s regarding atmosphere – surface temperatures range from -120°C to 30°C on Mars and -88°C to 58°C on Earth, and the gases most abundant in Mars’ atmosphere are also the most abundant in Earth’s (though the actual percentages are very different)<sup>[3](https://mars.nasa.gov/allaboutmars/facts/)</sup> – and regarding planetary composition <sup>[3](https://mars.nasa.gov/allaboutmars/facts/)</sup>, but its size is somewhat different from Earth’s and Venus’ – Martian mass is ~11% of Earth’s and Martian gravity is ~38% of Earth’s (though most scientists agree that this is still sufficient gravity that humans would eventually be able to adapt <sup>[4](https://www.mars-one.com/faq/mission-to-mars/why-mars-and-not-another-planet)</sup>).

Although Mars is not the Earth-replica potential colonists would hope for, it’s by far better than Venus as temperatures on Earth are closer to Martian temperatures than to Venusian temperatures, it is mechanically easier (with present technology) to heat things than to cool them, the Martian atmosphere (though thin) offers some level of protection from radiation and will not actively be suffocating humans (or their solar panels and communications equipment) as would Venus, the Martian circadian rhythm is similar to Earth’s, and water can be extracted from Martian soil (latter two are not strictly necessary but are still rather helpful features).

Now that we’ve established that Mars is clearly the best choice for an extra-planetary landing (whether it be simply a short scientific, touch-and-go mission or full-on colonization), there still exists the challenge of actual transportation. Humans have already sent a host of rovers and orbiters to the red planet, making it clear that getting to Mars is a solved problem. However, humans are much more fragile than most space probes and need to be protected from a variety of factors on the way to Mars.

Humans would have to be protected from high intensity radiation from galactic cosmic rays (GCRs) and the sun without the benefit of an atmosphere nor a magnetosphere. There are two ways to protect against this radiation: use a lot more of the materials we are already using for spacecraft construction - which would prove to be far too heavy and expensive - or use more efficient shielding materials and techniques - which are theoretically possible but are still in research & development <sup>[5](https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/real-martians-how-to-protect-astronauts-from-space-radiation-on-mars)</sup>.

Additionally, humans are ultimately living, thinking creatures and all those things we deal with here on Earth – disease, injury, psychology, and muscle atrophy among many obstacles – will have to be accounted for during the one-year-minimum flight to Mars <sup>[6](https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/getting-sick-in-space-on-the-way-to-mars)</sup>.

Even the common cold becomes problematic in space. For as-yet unknown reasons, in space, immune systems are weaker and bacteria are stronger. Additionally, a crew capsule will be confined (keeping crew members in constant close contact), all capsule equipment is shared, and there are few opportunities to wash up. Finally, astronauts have a tough job and getting sick leads to poor judgement and fatigue which can lead to disasterous results. This creates a perfect environment to transform a common cold into something a little stronger and potentially much more dangerous.

Injuries are not altogether impossible to handle, but when astronauts are 8 months away from the nearest medical care, injuries also become much more dangerous. Crew members are routinely trained in first aid, CPR, etc., but even if there were a licensed mediccal doctor on-board, anything serious may need an expert from Earth to give instructions, but that communication at such distances have a 20-minute latency. The same is true for the psychological issues humans are famous for. Anyone who has sat in a confined space (such as in a car during a road trip) with another person will know that humans tend to go “stir-crazy” after some time. Psychologists and other experts are researching coping methods for astronauts who will be in an extremely confined spaces with the same people for long periods of time far away from anything recognizable in unsafe, high-stress, high-risk environments. Methods such as meditation, virtual reality, and even simple nature posters are being studied for their potential utility, but maintaining an astronaut's sanity under such conditions appears to be an impossible task.

Possibly the most impossible of all these obstacles remains, however. Given the time and resources, humans can do amazing things and solve impossible problems. However, that time and those resources are not likely to be granted anytime soon. The main group developing space research is NASA which – as a department of the US government – is subject to the whim of that year’s administration. The constantly-changing directives from each subsequent president and congress has forced NASA to abandon potentially fruitful research and restart old, stale research. In computer science, there is a concept called “context switching” which essentially means that it is computationally expensive to store local variables in long-term storage and reload other local variables when switching the frame of operations. By this same logic, NASA could be much more effective if it was not forced to context switch every 4-8 years. There are other organizations – ESA, Roscosmos, SpaceX, etc. – which can conduct research independently of NASA, but an undertaking such as a manned mission to Mars is likely to require international cooperation and thus NASA’s contribution.

-----

Space is hard. There are regular manned missions to the ISS and new probes are being launched seemingly every few weeks. However, manned missions to other planets is another beast entirely. While not impossible in theory, a manned mission to another planet (i.e. Mars) requires much more research, time, and funding before such a mission can launch. Some sources put an estimated deadline of the year 2030 for the launch of a manned mission to Mars, however there are still significant challenges that need to be addressed first.

-----

# References

<sup>[1]</sup> <http://earthguide.ucsd.edu/eoc/special_topics/teach/sp_climate_change/p_planet_temp.html>

<sup>[2]</sup> <http://sci.esa.int/venus-express/34067-venus-vs-earth/>

<sup>[3]</sup> <https://mars.nasa.gov/allaboutmars/facts/>

<sup>[4]</sup> <https://www.mars-one.com/faq/mission-to-mars/why-mars-and-not-another-planet>

<sup>[5]</sup> <https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/real-martians-how-to-protect-astronauts-from-space-radiation-on-mars>

<sup>[6]</sup> https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/getting-sick-in-space-on-the-way-to-mars

<sup>[7]</sup> https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/newhorizons/overview/
